# how the enlightenment ends

- [Henry Kissinger](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/06/henry-kissinger-ai-could-mean-the-end-of-human-history/559124/), 2022-07-28
- *"the enlightenment started with philosophical insights spread by a new technology. our period has generated a novel technology in search of a guiding philosophy."*

- ---

- Heretofore, the technological advance that most altered the course of modern history was the invention of the **printing press** in the 15th century, which **allowed** the search for **empirical knowledge to supplant liturgical doctrine, and the Age of Reason to gradually supersede the Age of Religion.** Individual insight and scientific knowledge replaced faith as the principal criterion of human consciousness. Information was stored and systematized in expanding libraries. The Age of Reason originated the thoughts and actions that shaped the contemporary world order.
- Users of the internet emphasize retrieving and manipulating information over contextualizing or conceptualizing its meaning. They rarely interrogate history or philosophy; as a rule, they demand information relevant to their immediate practical needs.
    - In the process, search-engine algorithms acquire the capacity to predict the preferences of individual clients, enabling the algorithms to personalize results and make them available to other parties for political or commercial purposes. **Truth becomes relative.** Information threatens to overwhelm wisdom.
- in truth many technophiles use the internet to avoid the solitude they dread. All of these pressures weaken the fortitude required to develop and sustain convictions that can be implemented only by traveling a lonely road, which is the essence of creativity.
    - The digital world's emphasis on speed inhibits reflection; its incentive empowers the radical over the thoughtful; its **values are shaped by subgroup consensus, not by introspection.**
    - A growing percentage of human activity will, within a measurable time period, be driven by AI algorithms. But these algorithms, being mathematical interpretations of observed data, do not explain the underlying reality that produces them.
- will AI, left to its own devices, inevitably develop slight deviations that could, over time, cascade into catastrophic departures?
- that **in achieving intended goals, AI may change human thought processes and human values.**
    - A player sought not only to win, but also to learn new strategies potentially applicable to other of life's dimensions. For its part, by contrast, AI knows only one purpose: to win. It "learns" not conceptually but mathematically, by marginal adjustments to its algorithms. So in learning to win Go by playing it differently than humans do, AI has **changed both the game's nature and its impact.**
- ::Through all human history, civilizations have created ways to explain the world around them--in the Middle Ages, religion; in the Enlightenment, reason; in the 19th century, history; in the 20th century, ideology.:: The most difficult yet important question about the world into which we are headed is this: What will become of human consciousness if its own explanatory power is surpassed by AI, and **societies are no longer able to interpret the world they inhabit in terms that are meaningful to them?**
- How is consciousness to be defined in a world of machines that reduce human experience to mathematical data, interpreted by their own memories these questions are left to *technologists* and to the intelligentsia of related scientific fields. 
    - Philosophers and others in the **field of the humanities** who helped shape previous concepts of world order tend to be disadvantaged, lacking knowledge of AI's mechanisms or being overawed by its capacities.
    - In contrast, the **scientific world** is impelled to explore the technical possibilities of its achievements, and the technological world is preoccupied with commercial vistas of fabulous scale. The incentive of both these worlds is to push the limits of discoveries rather than to comprehend them.
    - And **governance**, insofar as it deals with the subject, is more likely to investigate AI's applications for security and intelligence than to explore the transformation of the human condition that it has begun to produce.
- *The Enlightenment* started with essentially **philosophical insights spread by a new technology.** Our period is moving in the opposite direction. It has generated a potentially **dominating technology in search of a guiding philosophy.**
